Initial section on testing (#30)
openjdk/guide: src/index.md

_Congratulations!_ Your changeset will now make its way towards a promoted build. When the changeset becomes part of a promoted build, the bug's "Resolved in Build" will have a value of \"b\[1-9\]\[0-9\]&ast;\" to indicate the build number.

# Testing Changes

In addition to your own Java applications, OpenJDK have support for two test frameworks, JTReg and GTest. JTReg is a Java regression test framework that is used for most of the tests that are included in the OpenJDK source repository. The Google Test (GTest) framework is intended for unit testing of the C++ native code.

> 

Reviewer: There's lots of C++ code in the JDK client - some of it shared, some of it windows specific. None of that is set up or likely appropriate for gtest to test it so if you are thinking of hotspot C++ code may be you should say that ..

Reviewer 2: Although you updated Gtest's introduction paragraph to reflect that as of now gtest is for hotspot only, I think it needs to be said here as well.

> The Google Test (GTest) framework is intended for unit testing of the C++ native code.

this statement can also create an inadequate impression that you can't/shouldn't test native code w/ jtreg, this isn't the case as one can a) test native code thru java API; b) use native test code in jtreg tests. 

btw, point b) might deserve a sentence or two in JTreg section of this document.

Author: Please provide a sentence or two about b). Or maybe add that as a separate change so that you get proper credit for it and can become a Committer soon :-)

## JTReg

In depth documentation about the JTReg framework is found here: [JTReg harness](https://openjdk.java.net/jtreg/). JTReg itself is available in the [Code Tools Project](https://openjdk.java.net/projects/code-tools/).

Below is a small example of a JTReg test. It’s a clean Java class with a main method that is called from the test harness. If the test fails we throw a RuntimeException. This is picked up by the harness and is reported as a test failure. Try to always write a meaningful message in the exception. One that actually helps with understanding what went wrong once the test fails.

    /*
     * @test

>      * @summary Make sure feature X handles Y correctly

Reviewer 2: I guess you are thinking about `@library`, `@library` tag must be before any `@run` tags, which include `@build`, `@compile`, `@ignore` tags.

>      * @summary Make sure feature X handles Y correctly

Reviewer 2: >  I see no mention of this is the documents in /doc/ so I've added a sentence about this here.

right, we don't have anything about jtreg test in `/doc` (other than about execution), I guess this is partially b/c jtreg documentation is sufficient enough, partially b/c different areas/teams/components/subcomponents/... have different views on what good jtreg test is, and partially b/c we have never dedicated enough resources to make it done. I'd say though that there is a JBS issue (or two) to address that and add documentation about different jtreg tags and how they are to be used, available test libraries, keywords, etc.

                throw new RuntimeException("X.y() gave " + result + ", expexted " + expected_result);
            }
        }
    }

This example only utilizes two JTReg specific tags, `@test` and `@summary`. `@test` simply tells JTReg that this class is a test, and `@summary` provides a description of the test. There are several other tags that can be used in JTReg tests. You can for instance associate the test with a specific bug that this test is a regression test for.

    @bug 7000001

Or you can specify a number of requirements that must be fulfilled for JTReg to execute the test.

    @requires docker.support
    @requires os.family != ”windows”
    @requires os.maxMemory > 3G
    @requires os.arch=="x86_64" | os.arch=="amd64"

You can also specify if the test requires specific modules, and you can specify command line flags and run the test in several different ways.

    @modules java.base/jdk.internal.misc
    @run main/othervm -Xmx128m TestStringEndify

Note that you can have several `@run` tags in the same test with different command line options.

The [JTReg documentation](https://openjdk.java.net/jtreg/) provides information on many more tags like these.

> 

Reviewer: Also jtreg supports the @key tag which may have a value used to filter test selection. As a specific example if you have a UI test which needs to display a window, you should specify
@key headful
This one is important to make sure the test harness does not try to run tests on a system which does not support those tests.  Make sure you understand the conventions for the particular area you are testing since this is just an example.

Author: At some point we should list the conventions for different areas here. I'm adding that to the todo-list. Meanwhile I have added the examples you provided here together with a note on the importance of understanding the conventions.

    }

    TEST(Demo, quicksort) {
      int test_array[] = {7,1,5,3,6,9,8,2,4,0};
      int expected_array[] = {0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9};

      QuickSort::sort(test_array, 10, demo_comparator, false);
      for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
        ASSERT_EQ(expected_array[i], test_array[i]);
      }
    }

`ASSERT_EQ` is one example of an assertion that can be used in the test. Below are a few other examples. A full list is found in the [Google Test Documentation](https://github.com/google/googletest/blob/master/googletest/docs/primer.md).

    EXPECT_TRUE(condition);
    EXPECT_FALSE(condition);
    ASSERT_TRUE(condition);
    ASSERT_FALSE(condition);
    EXPECT_EQ(expected, actual);
    EXPECT_NE(val1, val2);
    EXPECT_LT(val1, val2);
    EXPECT_LE(val1, val2);
    EXPECT_GT(val1, val2);
    EXPECT_GE(val1, val2);
    EXPECT_STREQ(expected_str, actual_str);

`ASSERT` is a fatal assertion and will give you fast failure. That means that test execution will be stopped and the failure will be reported. `EXPECT` is a nonfatal assertion and will report the error but continues to run the test. All assertions have both an `ASSERT` and an `EXPECT` variant.

### Running OpenJDK GTests

> To run GTests in OpenJDK use make:

Author: Good catch!

>     make test-hotspot-gtest

Reviewer 2: `make test TEST=gtest` is a more appropriate way to run gtest tests. it also supports test name-based filtering:
 * `make test TEST=gtest` and  `make test TEST=gtest:all` run all gtest tests
 * `make test TEST=gtest:code.*:os.*` runs gtest whose name matches `code.*:os.*` regexp (actually `code.*:os.*.*`)
 *  `make test TEST=gtest:$X/$variant` runs tests which match `$X.*` regexp on `$variant` of VM (client, server, etc)

Author: Ok. I've updated the text. Thanks!

There are several other tags that can be used in JTReg tests. You can for instance associate the test with a specific bug that this test is a regression test for.

    @bug 7000001

Or you can specify a number of requirements that must be fulfilled for JTReg to execute the test.

    @requires docker.support
    @requires os.family != ”windows”
    @requires os.maxMemory > 3G
    @requires os.arch=="x86_64" | os.arch=="amd64"

You can also specify if the test requires specific modules, and you can specify command line flags and run the test in several different ways.

    @modules java.base/jdk.internal.misc
    @run main/othervm -Xmx128m TestXY

Note that you can have several `@run` tags in the same test with different command line options.

> JTReg also have support for labeling tests with arbitrary keys using the `@key` tag. These keywords can then be used to filter the test selection. For instance if you have a UI test which needs to display a window you'll want to make sure the test harness doesn't try to run this test on a system which doesn't support headful tests. You do this by specifying

Reviewer 2: JTReg doesn't support arbitrary keywords in `@key`, all keywords are to be registered in `TEST.ROOT` file.

Author: Ah. Fixed. The JTReg documentation says "The list of acceptable keywords may be specified in the TEST.ROOT file" which I interpret as "this may be done, but it doesn't have to be done".

    static int demo_comparator(int a, int b) {
      if (a == b) {
        return 0;
      }
      if (a < b) {
        return -1;
      }
      return 1;
    }

    TEST(Demo, quicksort) {
      int test_array[] = {7,1,5,3,6,9,8,2,4,0};
      int expected_array[] = {0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9};

      QuickSort::sort(test_array, 10, demo_comparator, false);
      for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
        ASSERT_EQ(expected_array[i], test_array[i]);
      }
    }

`ASSERT_EQ` is one example of an assertion that can be used in the test. Below are a few other examples. A full list is found in the [Google Test Documentation](https://github.com/google/googletest/blob/master/googletest/docs/primer.md).

    EXPECT_TRUE(condition);
    EXPECT_FALSE(condition);
    ASSERT_TRUE(condition);
    ASSERT_FALSE(condition);
    EXPECT_EQ(expected, actual);
    EXPECT_NE(val1, val2);
    EXPECT_LT(val1, val2);
    EXPECT_LE(val1, val2);
    EXPECT_GT(val1, val2);
    EXPECT_GE(val1, val2);

>     EXPECT_STREQ(expected_str, actual_str);

Reviewer 2: do we really need to list these guys here? referring to google test documentations seems to be enough.

in case there is a good reason to have this list here, `ASSERT_TRUE` and `ASSERT_FALSE` can be removed b/c the following paragraph explains that all these macros have an `ASSERT` variant.

Author: Agreed. I wanted to have just a couple but couldn't choose which ones :-)
I have removed most but kept a few just to have some examples to talk about.

> `ASSERT` is a fatal assertion and will give you fast failure. That means that test execution will be stopped and the failure will be reported. `EXPECT` is a nonfatal assertion and will report the error but continues to run the test. All assertions have both an `ASSERT` and an `EXPECT` variant.

Reviewer 2: strictly speaking, `ASSERT` stops execution of the current method (as in fact it's just: change test's status, print message, `return`), so if a test uses `ASSERT` in a subroutine, its _main test code_ has to call a subroutine within  `ASSERT_NO_FATAL_FAILURE` macro. it's explained in greater detail in `doc/hotspot-unit-tests.md`.

Author: Is there an easy way to explain this or can we leave more complex examples with subroutines to `doc/hotspot-unit.tests.md`?

Reviewer 2: I guess smth like "`ASSERT` interrupts execution of the current subroutine" should be sufficient for people to get started.

> For more information on how to write good GTests in OpenJDK, see [`doc/hotspot-unit-tests.md`](https://github.com/openjdk/jdk/blob/master/doc/hotspot-unit-tests.md).

Reviewer 2: just to avoid confusion, I'd prefer to be explicit here and say that `doc/hotspot-unit-tests.md` provides information about how to write good gtest tests for hotspot.

Author: Ok.

_Congratulations!_ Your changeset will now make its way towards a promoted build. When the changeset becomes part of a promoted build, the bug's "Resolved in Build" will have a value of \"b\[1-9\]\[0-9\]&ast;\" to indicate the build number.

# Testing Changes

In addition to your own Java applications, OpenJDK have support for two test frameworks, JTReg and GTest. JTReg is a Java regression test framework that is used for most of the tests that are included in the OpenJDK source repository. The Google Test (GTest) framework is intended for unit testing of the C++ native code. Currently only JVM testing is supported by the GTest framework. Other areas use JTReg for unit testing of C++ code.

> This section provides a brief summary of how to get started with testing in OpenJDK. For more information on configuration and how to use the OpenJDK test framework, a.k.a. "run-test framework", see [`doc/testing.md`](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/openjdk/jdk/blob/master/doc/testing.html).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This section provides a brief summary of how to get started with testing in OpenJDK. For more information on configuration and how to use the OpenJDK test framework, a.k.a. "run-test framework", see [`doc/testing.html`](https://openjdk.java.net/groups/build/doc/testing.html).
```

Author: Is this document updated as changes happen in the source .md-files?

Author: Links reverted back to point to the .md files in the source.

In general all changes should come with a regression test so if you're writing product code you should also be writing test code. There are a few examples where it doesn't make sence to write an explicit regression test. These should be tagged in JBS with one of the [noreg-labels](#noreg).

A few key items to think about when writing a regression test:

* A regression test should execute fast - a few seconds at most
* The test should only test the desired functionality - if you have several features to test, write more tests
* The test should pass reliably on all supported platforms - watch out for platform-specific differences such as path separators

> The JTReg documentation has a section on [how to write good JTReg tests](https://openjdk.java.net/jtreg/writetests.html).

Reviewer 4: Perhaps include a comment to indicate that binary files should not be checked into the workspace and if the test needs to use one, the test should create it in some fashion.

Also if possible avoid shell scripts and relying on external commands as much as necessary.

Author: Yes. Added.

## JTReg

In-depth documentation about the JTReg framework is found here: [JTReg harness](https://openjdk.java.net/jtreg/). JTReg itself is available in the [Code Tools Project](https://openjdk.java.net/projects/code-tools/).

Below is a small example of a JTReg test. It’s a clean Java class with a main method that is called from the test harness. If the test fails we throw a RuntimeException. This is picked up by the harness and is reported as a test failure. Try to always write a meaningful message in the exception. One that actually helps with understanding what went wrong once the test fails.

    /*
     * @test
     * @summary Make sure feature X handles Y correctly
     * @run main TestXY
     */
    public class TestXY {
        public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
            var result = X.y();
            if (result != expected_result) {
                throw new RuntimeException("X.y() gave " + result + ", expexted " + expected_result);
            }
        }

>     }

Reviewer 4: Should there be a mention of trying to be consistent with other tests in a test folder, that is if they are using TestNG,  follow that pattern

Should we indicate when to use a TEST.properties file vs. including the properties within the test?

Reviewer 2: >Should we indicate when to use a TEST.properties file vs. including the properties within the test?

`TEST.properties` files aren't intended to be used by tests, they are jtreg configurations file, so using them for test-specific properties might lead to name clashes and unexpected behaviors.

Author: Let's agree on not adding anything about TEST.properties at this point. I have added a note in the todo-list about the need for documented best practices for this. Once the text is written we can discuss where to put it.

    static int demo_comparator(int a, int b) {
      if (a == b) {
        return 0;
      }
      if (a < b) {
        return -1;
      }
      return 1;
    }

    TEST(Demo, quicksort) {
      int test_array[] = {7,1,5,3,6,9,8,2,4,0};
      int expected_array[] = {0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9};

      QuickSort::sort(test_array, 10, demo_comparator, false);
      for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
        ASSERT_EQ(expected_array[i], test_array[i]);
      }
    }

`ASSERT_EQ` is one example of an assertion that can be used in the test. Below are a few other examples. A full list is found in the [Google Test Documentation](https://github.com/google/googletest/blob/master/googletest/docs/primer.md).

    ASSERT_TRUE(condition);
    ASSERT_FALSE(condition);
    EXPECT_EQ(expected, actual);
    EXPECT_LT(val1, val2);
    EXPECT_STREQ(expected_str, actual_str);

`ASSERT` is a fatal assertion and will interrupt execution of the current sub-routine. `EXPECT` is a nonfatal assertion and will report the error but continues to run the test. All assertions have both an `ASSERT` and an `EXPECT` variant.

> For more information on how to write good GTests in HotSpot, see [`doc/hotspot-unit-tests.md`](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/openjdk/jdk/blob/master/doc/hotspot-unit-tests.html).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For more information on how to write good GTests in HotSpot, see [`doc/hotspot-unit-tests.md`](https://github.com/openjdk/jdk/blob/master/doc/hotspot-unit-tests.md).
```

Author: That's what I initially linked to, but it doesn't look very nice...
